doc/some_examples.rst, before:

Examples
========

Example 1 - Custom controller class, automatic targets
------------------------------------------------------

In this this example a model of a CA1 Basket cell will be 
optimized using automatic target extraction.

.. note::
   This example is design such that the in-line (code) 
   documentation should be read as well as the explanation 
   between the code snippets. 

This means that we will provide our model with a csv file containing time 
vs voltage data and Optimal Neuron will analyse this file and extract
features automatically. This convenience makes it a good place to start.

These examples are located in the examples module of Optimal Neuron, you
should also use some raw data (or the csv file provided) to test out 
your own model.

For this example we will be writing and optimizing a model written in the Python
programming language and the NEURON library.

The first thing will do is define a simulation class, this can also be accomplished
by a simple function, but the class defined here gives us some powerful functionality:

.. note::
   This simulation class is not necessary when writing a 
   model for optimization, however it is good practice 
   because it makes our code more modular and easier to understand.

.. code-block:: python

    class Simulation(object):
    
        """
        Simulation class - inspired by example of Philipp Rautenberg
    
            Objects of this class control a current clamp simulation. Example of use:
    
                >>> cell = Cell() #some kind of NEURON section
                >>> sim = Simulation(cell)
                >>> sim.go()
                >>> sim.show()
    
        """
    
        def __init__(self, recording_section, sim_time=1000, dt=0.05, v_init=-60):
    
            self.recording_section = recording_section
            self.sim_time = sim_time
            self.dt = dt
            self.go_already = False
            self.v_init=v_init
    
        def set_IClamp(self, delay=5, amp=0.1, dur=1000):
            """
            Initializes values for current clamp.
            
            Default values:
              
              delay = 5 [ms]
              amp   = 0.1 [nA]
              dur   = 1000 [ms]
    
            """
            stim = h.IClamp(self.recording_section(0.5))
            stim.delay = delay
            stim.amp = amp
            stim.dur = dur
            self.stim = stim
    
        def set_recording(self):
            # Record Time
            self.rec_t = neuron.h.Vector()
            self.rec_t.record(h._ref_t)
            # Record Voltage
            self.rec_v = h.Vector()
            self.rec_v.record(self.recording_section(0.5)._ref_v)
    
        def show(self):
            """
            Plot the result of the simulation once it's been intialized
            """
    
            from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
    
            if self.go_already:
                x = np.array(self.rec_t)
                y = np.array(self.rec_v)
    
                plt.plot(x, y)
                plt.title("Simulation voltage vs time")
                plt.xlabel("Time [ms]")
                plt.ylabel("Voltage [mV]")
    
            else:
                print("""First you have to `go()` the simulation.""")
            plt.show()
        
        def go(self, sim_time=None):
            """
            Start the simulation once it's been intialized
            """
    
            self.set_recording()
            h.dt = self.dt
            
            h.finitialize(self.v_init)
            neuron.init()
            if sim_time:
                neuron.run(sim_time)
            else:
                neuron.run(self.sim_time)
            self.go_already = True

The next thing we will do is define our custom controller. 
The controller in Optimal Neuron is what actually runs the simulation.
Optimal Neuron provides off-the-shelf controllers for common needs,
however this one is customised to make the purpose of the controller
more clear. This is a "canonical controller" because it takes as an input an array
of candidates (candidate solutions - strings of numbers corresponding
to the parameter set of a solution proposed by the optimizer) and returns
a corresponding array of voltage traces. It is also considered canonical because
it provides a run method.


.. code-block:: python

    class BasketCellController():
    
        """
        This is a canonical example of a controller class
    
        It provides a run() method, this run method must accept at least two parameters:
            1. candidates (list of list of numbers)
            2. The corresponding parameters. 
        """
    
        def run(self,candidates,parameters):
            """
            Run simulation for each candidate
            
            This run method will loop through each candidate and run the simulation
            corresponding to it's parameter values. It will populate an array called
            traces with the resulting voltage traces for the simulation and return it.
            """
    
            traces = []
            for candidate in candidates:
                sim_var = dict(zip(parameters,candidate))
                t,v = self.run_individual(sim_var)
                traces.append([t,v])
    
            return traces
    
        def set_section_mechanism(self, sec, mech, mech_attribute, mech_value):
            """
            Set the value of an attribute of a NEURON section
            """
            for seg in sec:
                setattr(getattr(seg, mech), mech_attribute, mech_value)
        
        def run_individual(self,sim_var):
            """
            Run an individual simulation.
    
            The candidate data has been flattened into the sim_var dict. The
            sim_var dict contains parameter:value key value pairs, which are
            applied to the model before it is simulated.
    
            The simulation itself is carried out via the instantiation of a
            Simulation object (see Simulation class above).
    
            """
    
            #make compartments and connect them
            soma=h.Section()
            axon=h.Section()
            soma.connect(axon)
        
            axon.insert('na')
            axon.insert('kv')
            axon.insert('kv_3')
            soma.insert('na')
            soma.insert('kv')
            soma.insert('kv_3')
        
            soma.diam=10
            soma.L=10
            axon.diam=2
            axon.L=100
        
            #soma.insert('canrgc')
            #soma.insert('cad2')
        
            self.set_section_mechanism(axon,'na','gbar',sim_var['axon_gbar_na'])
            self.set_section_mechanism(axon,'kv','gbar',sim_var['axon_gbar_kv'])
            self.set_section_mechanism(axon,'kv_3','gbar',sim_var['axon_gbar_kv3'])
            self.set_section_mechanism(soma,'na','gbar',sim_var['soma_gbar_na'])
            self.set_section_mechanism(soma,'kv','gbar',sim_var['soma_gbar_kv'])
            self.set_section_mechanism(soma,'kv_3','gbar',sim_var['soma_gbar_kv3'])
        
            for sec in h.allsec():
                sec.insert('pas')
                sec.Ra=300
                sec.cm=0.75
                self.set_section_mechanism(sec,'pas','g',1.0/30000)
                self.set_section_mechanism(sec,'pas','e',-70)
        
            h.vshift_na=-5.0
            sim=Simulation(soma,sim_time=1000,v_init=-70.0)
            sim.set_IClamp(150, 0.1, 750)
            sim.go()
        
            sim.show()
        
            return np.array(sim.rec_t), np.array(sim.rec_v)
    
The function **main()** is where  the actual optimization takes place - the evaluator,
controller and optimizer classes are instantiated into objects and the optimizer **optimize()**
method is invoked:

.. code-block:: python

    def main():    
        """
        The optimization runs in this main method
        """
        
        #make a controller
        my_controller= BasketCellController()
        
        #parameters to be modified in each simulation
        parameters = ['axon_gbar_na',
                      'axon_gbar_kv',
                      'axon_gbar_kv3',
                      'soma_gbar_na',
                      'soma_gbar_kv',
                      'soma_gbar_kv3']
        
        #above parameters will not be modified outside these bounds:
        min_constraints = [0,0,0,0,0,0]
        max_constraints = [10000,30,1,300,20,2]
    
    
        # EXAMPLE - how to set a seed
        #manual_vals=[50,50,2000,70,70,5,0.1,28.0,49.0,-73.0,23.0] 
    
        #analysis variables, these default values will do:
        analysis_var={'peak_delta':0,
                      'baseline':0,
                      'dvdt_threshold':2}
        
        weights={'average_minimum': 1.0,
                 'spike_frequency_adaptation': 1.0,
                 'trough_phase_adaptation': 1.0,
                 'mean_spike_frequency': 1.0,
                 'average_maximum': 1.0,
                 'trough_decay_exponent': 1.0,
                 'interspike_time_covar': 1.0,
                 'min_peak_no': 1.0,
                 'spike_broadening': 1.0,
                 'spike_width_adaptation': 1.0,
                 'max_peak_no': 1.0,
                 'first_spike_time': 1.0,
                 'peak_decay_exponent': 1.0,
                 'pptd_error':1.0}
        
        
        
        #make an evaluator, using automatic target evaluation:
        my_evaluator=evaluators.IClampEvaluator(controller=my_controller,
                                                analysis_start_time=1,
                                                analysis_end_time=500,
                                                target_data_path='100pA_1.csv',
                                                parameters=parameters,
                                                analysis_var=analysis_var,
                                                weights=weights,
                                                targets=None, # because we're using automatic
                                                automatic=True)
    
        #make an optimizer
        my_optimizer=optimizers.CustomOptimizerA(max_constraints,min_constraints,my_evaluator,
                                          population_size=3,
                                          max_evaluations=100,
                                          num_selected=3,
                                          num_offspring=3,
                                          num_elites=1,
                                          seeds=None)
    
        #run the optimizer
        my_optimizer.optimize()
    
    main()
    

Example 2 - Custom controller class, manual targets
----------------------------------------------------------------
In this this example a CA1 basket cell will be optimized using manual targets.

This is actually pretty easy. In the example above when the evaluator is defined,
there is a line:

.. code-block:: python
    automatic=true

We now create a targets directory, each target must be one which is
available to the specific evaluator, see the evaluator's documentation
to see what analysis it provides.

.. code-block:: python

    manual_targets={'average_minimum': -38.83,
             'spike_frequency_adaptation': 0.01,
             'trough_phase_adaptation': 0.005,
             'mean_spike_frequency': 47.35,
             'average_maximum': 29.32,
             'trough_decay_exponent': 0.11,
             'interspike_time_covar': 0.04,
             'min_peak_no': 34,
             'spike_broadening': 0.81,
             'spike_width_adaptation': 0.00,
             'max_peak_no': 35,
             'first_spike_time': 164.0,
             'peak_decay_exponent': -0.045,
             'pptd_error':0}

And then define the evaluator such that the **automatic** key is set to
false and the targets parameter is set to our targets dict:

.. warning::

   PPTD error and other such deviation functions should always be 0.
   PPTD error also does not work if a target data path is not provided and
   an error will result.

.. code-block:: python

   my_evaluator=evaluators.IClampEvaluator(controller=my_controller,
                                           analysis_start_time=1,
                                           analysis_end_time=500,
                                           target_data_path='100pA_1.csv',
                                           parameters=parameters,
                                           analysis_var=analysis_var,
                                           weights=weights,
                                           targets=manual_targets,
                                           automatic=False)


Example 3 - CLI controller, single-threaded
-------------------------------------------
In this example the model of a c. Elegans muscle will be optimized using
manual targets, CLI controller.

Example 4 - CLI controller, multi-threaded
------------------------------------------
As above but multi-threaded.

Commit message:

quick plug for Open Worm

doc/some_examples.rst, after:

Examples
========

Example 1 - Custom controller class, automatic targets
------------------------------------------------------

In this this example a model of a CA1 Basket cell will be 
optimized using automatic target extraction.

.. note::
   This example is design such that the in-line (code) 
   documentation should be read as well as the explanation 
   between the code snippets. 

This means that we will provide our model with a csv file containing time 
vs voltage data and Optimal Neuron will analyse this file and extract
features automatically. This convenience makes it a good place to start.

These examples are located in the examples module of Optimal Neuron, you
should also use some raw data (or the csv file provided) to test out 
your own model.

For this example we will be writing and optimizing a model written in the Python
programming language and the NEURON library.

The first thing will do is define a simulation class, this can also be accomplished
by a simple function, but the class defined here gives us some powerful functionality:

.. note::
   This simulation class is not necessary when writing a 
   model for optimization, however it is good practice 
   because it makes our code more modular and easier to understand.

.. code-block:: python

    class Simulation(object):
    
        """
        Simulation class - inspired by example of Philipp Rautenberg
    
            Objects of this class control a current clamp simulation. Example of use:
    
                >>> cell = Cell() #some kind of NEURON section
                >>> sim = Simulation(cell)
                >>> sim.go()
                >>> sim.show()
    
        """
    
        def __init__(self, recording_section, sim_time=1000, dt=0.05, v_init=-60):
    
            self.recording_section = recording_section
            self.sim_time = sim_time
            self.dt = dt
            self.go_already = False
            self.v_init=v_init
    
        def set_IClamp(self, delay=5, amp=0.1, dur=1000):
            """
            Initializes values for current clamp.
            
            Default values:
              
              delay = 5 [ms]
              amp   = 0.1 [nA]
              dur   = 1000 [ms]
    
            """
            stim = h.IClamp(self.recording_section(0.5))
            stim.delay = delay
            stim.amp = amp
            stim.dur = dur
            self.stim = stim
    
        def set_recording(self):
            # Record Time
            self.rec_t = neuron.h.Vector()
            self.rec_t.record(h._ref_t)
            # Record Voltage
            self.rec_v = h.Vector()
            self.rec_v.record(self.recording_section(0.5)._ref_v)
    
        def show(self):
            """
            Plot the result of the simulation once it's been intialized
            """
    
            from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
    
            if self.go_already:
                x = np.array(self.rec_t)
                y = np.array(self.rec_v)
    
                plt.plot(x, y)
                plt.title("Simulation voltage vs time")
                plt.xlabel("Time [ms]")
                plt.ylabel("Voltage [mV]")
    
            else:
                print("""First you have to `go()` the simulation.""")
            plt.show()
        
        def go(self, sim_time=None):
            """
            Start the simulation once it's been intialized
            """
    
            self.set_recording()
            h.dt = self.dt
            
            h.finitialize(self.v_init)
            neuron.init()
            if sim_time:
                neuron.run(sim_time)
            else:
                neuron.run(self.sim_time)
            self.go_already = True

The next thing we will do is define our custom controller. 
The controller in Optimal Neuron is what actually runs the simulation.
Optimal Neuron provides off-the-shelf controllers for common needs,
however this one is customised to make the purpose of the controller
more clear. This is a "canonical controller" because it takes as an input an array
of candidates (candidate solutions - strings of numbers corresponding
to the parameter set of a solution proposed by the optimizer) and returns
a corresponding array of voltage traces. It is also considered canonical because
it provides a run method.


.. code-block:: python

    class BasketCellController():
    
        """
        This is a canonical example of a controller class
    
        It provides a run() method, this run method must accept at least two parameters:
            1. candidates (list of list of numbers)
            2. The corresponding parameters. 
        """
    
        def run(self,candidates,parameters):
            """
            Run simulation for each candidate
            
            This run method will loop through each candidate and run the simulation
            corresponding to it's parameter values. It will populate an array called
            traces with the resulting voltage traces for the simulation and return it.
            """
    
            traces = []
            for candidate in candidates:
                sim_var = dict(zip(parameters,candidate))
                t,v = self.run_individual(sim_var)
                traces.append([t,v])
    
            return traces
    
        def set_section_mechanism(self, sec, mech, mech_attribute, mech_value):
            """
            Set the value of an attribute of a NEURON section
            """
            for seg in sec:
                setattr(getattr(seg, mech), mech_attribute, mech_value)
        
        def run_individual(self,sim_var):
            """
            Run an individual simulation.
    
            The candidate data has been flattened into the sim_var dict. The
            sim_var dict contains parameter:value key value pairs, which are
            applied to the model before it is simulated.
    
            The simulation itself is carried out via the instantiation of a
            Simulation object (see Simulation class above).
    
            """
    
            #make compartments and connect them
            soma=h.Section()
            axon=h.Section()
            soma.connect(axon)
        
            axon.insert('na')
            axon.insert('kv')
            axon.insert('kv_3')
            soma.insert('na')
            soma.insert('kv')
            soma.insert('kv_3')
        
            soma.diam=10
            soma.L=10
            axon.diam=2
            axon.L=100
        
            #soma.insert('canrgc')
            #soma.insert('cad2')
        
            self.set_section_mechanism(axon,'na','gbar',sim_var['axon_gbar_na'])
            self.set_section_mechanism(axon,'kv','gbar',sim_var['axon_gbar_kv'])
            self.set_section_mechanism(axon,'kv_3','gbar',sim_var['axon_gbar_kv3'])
            self.set_section_mechanism(soma,'na','gbar',sim_var['soma_gbar_na'])
            self.set_section_mechanism(soma,'kv','gbar',sim_var['soma_gbar_kv'])
            self.set_section_mechanism(soma,'kv_3','gbar',sim_var['soma_gbar_kv3'])
        
            for sec in h.allsec():
                sec.insert('pas')
                sec.Ra=300
                sec.cm=0.75
                self.set_section_mechanism(sec,'pas','g',1.0/30000)
                self.set_section_mechanism(sec,'pas','e',-70)
        
            h.vshift_na=-5.0
            sim=Simulation(soma,sim_time=1000,v_init=-70.0)
            sim.set_IClamp(150, 0.1, 750)
            sim.go()
        
            sim.show()
        
            return np.array(sim.rec_t), np.array(sim.rec_v)
    
The function **main()** is where  the actual optimization takes place - the evaluator,
controller and optimizer classes are instantiated into objects and the optimizer **optimize()**
method is invoked:

.. code-block:: python

    def main():    
        """
        The optimization runs in this main method
        """
        
        #make a controller
        my_controller= BasketCellController()
        
        #parameters to be modified in each simulation
        parameters = ['axon_gbar_na',
                      'axon_gbar_kv',
                      'axon_gbar_kv3',
                      'soma_gbar_na',
                      'soma_gbar_kv',
                      'soma_gbar_kv3']
        
        #above parameters will not be modified outside these bounds:
        min_constraints = [0,0,0,0,0,0]
        max_constraints = [10000,30,1,300,20,2]
    
    
        # EXAMPLE - how to set a seed
        #manual_vals=[50,50,2000,70,70,5,0.1,28.0,49.0,-73.0,23.0] 
    
        #analysis variables, these default values will do:
        analysis_var={'peak_delta':0,
                      'baseline':0,
                      'dvdt_threshold':2}
        
        weights={'average_minimum': 1.0,
                 'spike_frequency_adaptation': 1.0,
                 'trough_phase_adaptation': 1.0,
                 'mean_spike_frequency': 1.0,
                 'average_maximum': 1.0,
                 'trough_decay_exponent': 1.0,
                 'interspike_time_covar': 1.0,
                 'min_peak_no': 1.0,
                 'spike_broadening': 1.0,
                 'spike_width_adaptation': 1.0,
                 'max_peak_no': 1.0,
                 'first_spike_time': 1.0,
                 'peak_decay_exponent': 1.0,
                 'pptd_error':1.0}
        
        
        
        #make an evaluator, using automatic target evaluation:
        my_evaluator=evaluators.IClampEvaluator(controller=my_controller,
                                                analysis_start_time=1,
                                                analysis_end_time=500,
                                                target_data_path='100pA_1.csv',
                                                parameters=parameters,
                                                analysis_var=analysis_var,
                                                weights=weights,
                                                targets=None, # because we're using automatic
                                                automatic=True)
    
        #make an optimizer
        my_optimizer=optimizers.CustomOptimizerA(max_constraints,min_constraints,my_evaluator,
                                          population_size=3,
                                          max_evaluations=100,
                                          num_selected=3,
                                          num_offspring=3,
                                          num_elites=1,
                                          seeds=None)
    
        #run the optimizer
        my_optimizer.optimize()
    
    main()
    

Example 2 - Custom controller class, manual targets
----------------------------------------------------------------
In this this example a CA1 basket cell will be optimized using manual targets.

This is actually pretty easy. In the example above when the evaluator is defined,
there is a line:

.. code-block:: python
    automatic=true

We now create a targets directory, each target must be one which is
available to the specific evaluator, see the evaluator's documentation
to see what analysis it provides.

.. code-block:: python

    manual_targets={'average_minimum': -38.83,
             'spike_frequency_adaptation': 0.01,
             'trough_phase_adaptation': 0.005,
             'mean_spike_frequency': 47.35,
             'average_maximum': 29.32,
             'trough_decay_exponent': 0.11,
             'interspike_time_covar': 0.04,
             'min_peak_no': 34,
             'spike_broadening': 0.81,
             'spike_width_adaptation': 0.00,
             'max_peak_no': 35,
             'first_spike_time': 164.0,
             'peak_decay_exponent': -0.045,
             'pptd_error':0}

And then define the evaluator such that the **automatic** key is set to
false and the targets parameter is set to our targets dict:

.. warning::

   PPTD error and other such deviation functions should always be 0.
   PPTD error also does not work if a target data path is not provided and
   an error will result.

.. code-block:: python

   my_evaluator=evaluators.IClampEvaluator(controller=my_controller,
                                           analysis_start_time=1,
                                           analysis_end_time=500,
                                           target_data_path='100pA_1.csv',
                                           parameters=parameters,
                                           analysis_var=analysis_var,
                                           weights=weights,
                                           targets=manual_targets,
                                           automatic=False)


Example 3 - CLI controller, single-threaded
-------------------------------------------
In this example the model of a C. elegans muscle cell will be optimized using
manual targets, CLI controller. This work is part of the 'Open Worm Project'_.

.. _'Open Worm Project':http://www.openworm.org/

Example 4 - CLI controller, multi-threaded
------------------------------------------
As above but multi-threaded.
